---
layout: post
title:  "How to Read the Dictionary (in Python)"
date:   2022-09-12
author: Jackson Radandt
description: Confused about one of Python's most powerful data types? This is your one stop shop for understanding dictionaries!
image: /assets/images/dictionary.jpg
---
I did not have much familiarity with programming languages when I started learning Python. Some of the first things a beginner to Python learns are the different data types Python supports. `str`, `int`, `float`, `bool` all make enough sense; even `list` is simple enough. But a dictionary? That threw me off, and I could never find just a basic summary of working with dictionaries. So if you find yourself in a similar boat, hopefully you will find this useful!

### What is a dictionary?
Simply put, a dictionary is like a list, but instead of using numbers as an index, values in a dictionary are indexed by _keys_. So while I would use `mylist[0]` to access the first item in `mylist`, I would use `mydict[first_key]` to access the first item in a dictionary. (Note: `first_key` can be a string or an integer) Think of it as a key:value list. Every key in a dictionary must be unique and is immuteable (i.e. cannot be changed). Let's go through the basics of dictionaries.


### How to create a dictionary
Dictionaries are created by using curly brackets `{}`. Within the brackets, the key and value(s) are separated by a colon `:` and a comma `,` separates the keys. For example, below is how we could create a dictionary that contains some universities and their nicknames:

```
nicknames = {'BYU':'Cougars', 
             'Texas':'Longhorns', 
             'USC':'Trojans', 
             'Nebraska':'Cornhuskers'}
```
The keys in this dictionary are the names of the school, and the values are the nickname for each school.

You can also create a dictionary using `dict()`, which builds dictionaries directly from sequences of key-value pairs:

```
nicknames = dict([('BYU', 'Cougars), ('Texas', 'Longhorns'), ('USC', 'Trojans'), ('Nebraska', 'Cornhuskers')])
```

For more ways to create a dictionary, especially dict comprehesion, see [this post](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#dictionaries).

### How to access elements in the dictionary
You are probably familiar with how to index lists, and indexing dictionaries is similar. The biggest difference, as mentioned above, is what the index is. In a list, `mylist[0]` will return the first element in `mylist`. However, `nicknames[0]` returns an error. This is because elements in dictionaries cannot be accessed except by with their keys. So in the case of our `nicknames` dictionary, the first element can be accessed like this:

```
byu = nicknames['BYU']
byu
```
```
>>> 'Cougars'
```

Elements can also be accessed using the `get()` function, with the key as the argument.

```
tx = nicknames.get('Texas')
tx
```
```
>>> 'Longhorns'
```

### Changing or adding elements in a dictionary
Just as you can change the element at a certain index in a list, elements in a dictionary can be changed. For example, let's say when I said USC I meant the University of South Carolina, not the University of Southern California. I can change the value associated with `USC` like so:

```
nicknames['USC'] = 'Gamecocks'
nicknames
```
```
>>> {'BYU': 'Cougars',
    'Texas': 'Longhorns',
    'USC': 'Gamecocks',
    'Nebraska': 'Cornhuskers'}
```

Elements can be added to a dictionary by creating a new key and assigning it a value.

```
nicknames['Stanford'] = 'Cardinal'
nicknames
```
```
>>> {'BYU': 'Cougars',
    'Texas': 'Longhorns',
    'USC': 'Gamecocks',
    'Nebraska': 'Cornhuskers',
    'Stanford': 'Cardinal'}
```

### Some helpful dictionary methods
In addition to `get()`, here are some useful methods when using a dictionary:
* `clear()` - Remove all the elements from the dictionary
* `copy()` - Returns a copy of the dictionary
* `items()` - Returns a list containing a tuple for each key value pair
* `keys()` - Returns a list containing dictionary’s keys
* `pop()` - Remove the element with specified key
* `popitem()` - Removes the last inserted key-value pair
* `update()` - Updates dictionary with specified key-value pairs
* `values()` - Returns a list of all the values of dictionary
I find that `items()` and `popitem()` are especially useful, but play with all of them and let me know which ones you find the most useful!

### Final thoughts
We have barely scratched the surface on all that a dictionary can do. For example, dictionary keys and values can be all different data types.

```
new_dict = {0:'colleges',
            'names':['BYU','Texas A&M','Dartmouth', 'Duke'],
            'Size':[30000, 80000, 12000, 15000]
            'type':'university'}
```

You can even nest dictionaries inside of dictionaries.

```
dict_in_dict = {0:'colleges',
                'Utah':{'BYU':['Cougars', 'Provo'],
                             'Utah':['Utes', 'Salt Lake City'],
                             'Utah State':['Aggies', 'Logan']}
                }
 ```
Dictionaries can store a lot of data in a very manageable way. Lots of it can be accessed through a single key, and the data can be of all different types. Imagine if I continued the `dict_in_dict` dictionary, and added information for all 50 states. That would be a lot of information stored in one item! The power of dictionaries is immense. I hope you found this post useful, let me know in the comment how you have found dictionaries useful and some tips you have as well!

For more excellent posts on dictionaries, as well as learing more in depth, see [here](https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_dictionaries.asp), [here](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-dictionary/) and [here](https://realpython.com/python-dicts/).
